In this and the next few videos, I will introduce you to a concept and procedure called activation
maximization.
The general idea is to use gradient descent to find a human interpretable data pattern that a single
neuron in a deep learning network is tuned to.
In this video, I'll give a brief description.
I'll show some examples from computational vision research, and then I'll discuss the assumptions underlying
this method.
And then in the next few videos we will implement this technique in Python.
And we will consider and discuss whether llms actually conform to the assumptions of activation maximization.
So here is the motivation for this analysis method.
Imagine this is some deep learning network.
Of course this is not an LLM, just a general picture of a network.
So the question is what does this one neuron here code for?
What does it pay attention to in this stimulus data.
What is it tuned to?
So if you want to isolate the tuning of this one neuron, there are basically two ways that you can
do that.
One option is to show lots and lots of data samples and measure the activation that this neuron outputs.
And then you can find all of the input data samples that strongly activated this neuron.
And then you can see if you can find some meaningful description of those data samples.
A second option is to start from a random number sample, and then use gradient descent to optimize
that random matrix so that it specifically maximizes maximizes the activation of this one neuron here.
Now both of these methods are fine.
They're great.
They're used in deep learning models for Interpretability.
We will use this first approach a little bit later on.
For example, you can present lots of text to a model and see if you can find neurons that are more
active for, let's say, past tense versus present tense, or nouns versus verbs or something like that.
But this approach is more commonly used for something like mass univariate testing or linear probing
with logistic regression.
Anyway, activation maximization refers to this second approach, and that's what we are going to do
here.
It's a pretty neat approach because it's like the flipped version of how things normally work in deep
learning.
So typically you have a fixed data set and a randomly initialized model, and you use the data to train
the model.
Now for language models, of course the data are human written text taken from the web and books and
so on.
And for a computer vision model, the data are pictures that you get from the web, medical images,
whatever.
The point is that typically the data are not changed and the model is optimized after being initially
set to random numbers.
Now with activation maximization, we turn this whole thing around.
You start with a trained model and that is fixed.
This is already a good working model, and you don't want to fine tune it or change the weights or anything
like that.
Instead, you start with a data sample that is randomly initialized, and then you optimize that data
matrix so that it maximally activates some feature of the model, like the activation of a particular
neuron.
Activation.
Maximization has produced some really interesting insights in computer vision models.
So here you see an example of various maps that started off as random, and then we're optimized to
maximize the activation of particular neurons in different layers of a convolutional neural network.
So this is already a trained CNN that is designed to recognize image categories.
It's pretty neat and also a little bit spooky.
But you do see for example, this looks like a unit to that responds to something that looks like an
eyeball.
Uh, this one is like a dog unit.
Also down here we have some more dog neurons.
This one here, I'm not quite sure what this is.
This may be like a avocado cut in half.
And you still see the seed in there.
Anyway, I have to say, uh, that in order to get these kinds of compelling and human interpretable
images, you have to start with some statistical priors and do some additional tricks like dimension
compression, clustering and averaging in order to get results that look like this.
In fact, if you just start from literally random noise and you try to do this activation maximization
procedure, you tend to get results that are a little bit less human interpretable.
Now, these authors called this an example of rubbish.
I respectfully disagree, I think this actually worked very well.
It just didn't produce results that we humans can easily interpret as anything other than like curvy
patches of colors.
But that doesn't mean that the method didn't work, and it doesn't mean that this is not the way that
this particular neuron in this network sees the world.
So we should not expect that the internal workings of a deep learning model are necessarily all human
interpretable.
That's not even the case for actual biological neurons inside a human brain.
You know, they generally do not produce activation patterns that are easily human interpretable.
Of course, with some noteworthy exceptions that tend to get most of the attention in the scientific
literature.
Anyway, I certainly agree that this image is not as cleanly interpretable as the ones in the previous
slide, and in part this is because these random initializations are sometimes modified to be constrained
by strong priors, dimension compression, clustering, and other tricks that they use in this literature.
So there are several assumptions that underlie this analysis.
Activation maximization.
One assumption is that the neurons represent individual features, for example, that there is a neuron
that represents an eye or a dog face or a bus.
In the context of language, this assumption underlying activation maximization can be interpreted as
the assumption that individual neurons code for something like a concept or a specific word, or maybe
a group of semantically related words like banana and apple and pear.
Uh, or maybe a grammatical concept like past tense.
Maybe a neuron would reflect a single fact about the world.
Like who was president of the US in the year 1987?
So if this assumption is true, then activation maximization is likely to be a successful strategy.
Now, for various reasons, it turns out that this assumption is unlikely to be true, at least for
lots of neurons.
It might be the case for some individual neurons.
The second assumption is that activation of a unit in a deep learning network corresponds to importance.
It is possible that the activation of a given neuron is only meaningful as it relates to the activation
of lots of other neurons, so its activation on its own might not necessarily be meaningful.
Now, I don't want to keep comparing deep learning models to actual biological brains because they're
really nothing alike.
They have basically nothing whatsoever in common.
But in biological neurons, you also see that a suppression of activity can be as informative as an
increase in activity.
A third assumption is that the space that we are trying to optimize is smooth, continuous and differentiable,
and therefore optimizable at basically any step or any location in that space.
Now, that actually is not necessarily the case for language.
For example, a banana and an apple are semantically closely related, but there's nothing really in
between them.
There is no word that is one third of the way between banana and apple, and you can contrast that with
something like color, where there really is something that is one third of the way between yellow and
red.
The last assumption that I will mention here is that the optimized results, that is to say, the optimized
random data samples that maximally activate a given neuron are human interpretable.
I've already mentioned this in the previous slide, but human interpretability is certainly something
that we want.
It's something that we look for in interpretability research, but it's not necessarily the case that
everything inside of a model is necessarily interpretable to humans.
Okay, so that is the brief high level intro to activation maximization.
In the next video I will show you how to implement this technique in PyTorch using gradient descent.
We will continue to think about these assumptions and whether and to what extent they hold for LMS.